Restore `Commit` to the ABCI++ spec, and other late modifications (#8796)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/abci++/abci++_basic_concepts_002_draft.md

---

## Outline

- [ABCI++ vs. ABCI](#abci-vs-abci)
- [Method overview](#method-overview)
    - [Consensus/block execution methods](#consensusblock-execution-methods)
    - [Mempool methods](#mempool-methods)
    - [Info methods](#info-methods)
    - [State-sync methods](#state-sync-methods)
- [Next-block execution vs. same-block execution](#next-block-execution-vs-same-block-execution)
- [Tendermint proposal timeout](#tendermint-proposal-timeout)
- [Deterministic State-Machine Replication](#deterministic-state-machine-replication)
- [Events](#events)
- [Evidence](#evidence)
- [Errors](#errors)

# Overview and basic concepts

## ABCI++ vs. ABCI

[&uparrow; Back to Outline](#outline)

> With ABCI, the application can only act at one phase in consensus, immediately after a block has

Reviewer: IMO, legacy ABCI vs ABCI is a nicer distinction. Once ABCI++ settles, users will not know about the old thing and referencing it forever seems a little silly.

> With ABCI, the application can only act at one phase in consensus, immediately after a block has

Author: The decision we reached in one of the ABCI++ calls in January was this:
* for v0.36 we would keep the distinction ABCI vs ABCI++ to avoid any confusion (as both are actually distinct interfaces albeit with some common elements).
* then, once v0.36 was out for a while, and the time came to prepare for v0.37 we would decide whether ABCI (pre-v0.36) was really never to be seen again, at which point we might decide to rename ABCI++ into ABCI in our docs from v0.37 on.

See [Tendermint's expected behavior](abci++_tmint_expected_behavior_002_draft.md)
for details on the possible call sequences of these methods.

- [**InitChain:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#initchain) This method initializes the blockchain. Tendermint calls it once upon genesis.

- [**PrepareProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#prepareproposal) It allows the block
proposer to perform application-dependent work in a block before using it as its proposal.
This enables, for instance, batch optimizations to a block, which has been empirically demonstrated
to be a key component for scaling. Method `PrepareProposal` is called every time Tendermint is

> about to send a proposal message, but no previous proposal has been locked at Tendermint level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about to send a proposal message, but no previous proposal has been locked at the Tendermint level.
```

many (+2/3) validators send precommit votes for that block. Thus, `VerifyVoteExtension`
should be used with special care.
As a general rule, an Application that detects an invalid vote extension SHOULD
accept it in `ResponseVerifyVoteExtension` and ignore it in its own logic. Tendermint calls it when
a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

- [**FinalizeBlock:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#finalizeblock) It delivers a decided block to
the Application. The Application must execute the transactions in the block in order and update its
state accordingly. Cryptographic commitments to the block and transaction results, returned via the
corresponding parameters in `ResponseFinalizeBlock`, are included in the header of the next block.
Tendermint calls it when a new block is decided.

- [**Commit:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#commit) Instructs the Application to persist its
state. It is a fundamental part of Tendermint's crash-recovery mechanism that ensures the
synchronization between Tendermint and the Applicatin upon recovery. Tendermint calls it just after
having persisted the data returned by `ResponseFinalizeBlock`.

### Mempool methods

> - [**CheckTx:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#checktx) This method allows the Application to validate transactions against its current state, e.g., checking signatures and account balances. If a transaction passes the validation, then tendermint adds it to its local mempool, discarding it otherwise. Tendermint calls it when it receives a new transaction either coming from an external user or another node. Furthermore, Tendermint can be configured to call re-`CheckTx` on all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**CheckTx:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#checktx) This method allows the Application to validate transactions against its current state, e.g., checking signatures and account balances. If a transaction passes the validation, then Tendermint adds it to its local mempool, discarding it otherwise. Tendermint calls it when it receives a new transaction either coming from an external user or another node. Furthermore, Tendermint can be configured to call re-`CheckTx` on all
```

Author: Thanks for spotting

In the original ABCI protocol, the only moment when the Application had access to a
block was after it was decided. This led to a block execution model, called *next-block
execution*, where some fields hashed in a block header refer to the execution of the
previous block, namely:

- the Merkle root of the Application's state
- the transaction results
- the consensus parameter updates
- the validator updates

With ABCI++, an Application may decide to keep using the next-block execution model, by doing all
its processing in `FinalizeBlock`; however the new methods introduced, `PrepareProposal` and
`ProcessProposal` disclose the entire proposed block to the Application, allowing for its immediate
exectution. An Application implementing immediate exectution may additionally wish to store
certain data resulting from the block's execution in the same block that has just been executed.
This brings about a new execution model, called *same-block execution*. An Application
implementing this execution model, upon receiving a raw proposal via `RequestPrepareProposal`
and potentially modifying its transaction list, fully executes the resulting prepared proposal

> as though it was the decided block (immediate execution), and

Reviewer 2: Are we still planning to cut out the same-block execution text? Or is that only for the v0.36.x branch?

Author: Yes, but:

* only on v0.36.x branch
* once this one has landed both on master and v0.36.x

Some of the changes in this PR are subtly preparing for that.

  `ResponsePrepareProposal` and thus refers to the **current block**. Tendermint
  will use it in the prepared proposal's header.
- Likewise, the transaction results from executing the prepared proposal are
  provided in `ResponsePrepareProposal` and refer to the transactions in the
  **current block**. Tendermint will use them to calculate the results hash
  in the prepared proposal's header.
- The consensus parameter updates and validator updates are also provided in
  `ResponsePrepareProposal` and reflect the result of the prepared proposal's
  execution. They come into force in height H+1 (as opposed to the H+2 rule
  in next-block execution model).

If the Application decides to keep the next-block execution model, it will not
provide any data in `ResponsePrepareProposal`, other than a potentially modified
transaction list. The Application may choose to perform immediate execution even in next-block
execution mode, however same-block execution mode *requires* immediate execution.

In the long term, the execution model will be set in a new boolean parameter
*same_block* in `ConsensusParams`.
It **must not** be changed once the blockchain has started unless the Application

> developers *really* know what they are doing.

Author: Just making the MD warnings disappear

However, modifying `ConsensusParams` structure cannot be done lightly if we are to
preserve blockchain compatibility. Therefore we need an interim solution until
soft upgrades are specified and implemented in Tendermint. This somewhat *unsafe*
solution consists in Tendermint assuming same-block execution if the Application
fills the above mentioned fields in `ResponsePrepareProposal`.

> ## Tendermint proposal timeout

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Tendermint proposal timeout
```
I think this is still part of the same block next block execution piece right?

Author: I separated it for two reasons:

* The proposal timeout problem is not really linked to same-block execution, but to _immediate_ execution. You can have immediate execution (i.e., fully executing the block at `PrepareProposal`/`ProcessProposal` time) even if same-block execution (i.e., actually saving app_hash, tx_results, etc., in the block to be proposaed) is not implemented.
IOW, same-block does need immediate, but immediate does not need same-block.
* So I separated this in preparation for removing the previous "Next-block vs. same-block" in the v0.36.x branch.

Sources of non-determinism in applications may include:

- Hardware failures

>     - Cosmic rays, overheating, etc.

Reviewer 3: Lol

Author: :-)

Reviewer: Be careful when running Tendermint on a spacecraft.

Reviewer 2: "Issue 10499232331: Intergalactic gossip network stalls due to unreachable peers inside or behind spacetime singularities."

Author: That's the problem when you locate your full nodes on the dark side of the moon!

that are not included in block header computations, so we don't need agreement
on them. All other fields in the `Response*` must be strictly deterministic.

## Events

[&uparrow; Back to Outline](#outline)

Method `FinalizeBlock` includes an `events` field at the top level in its
`Response*`, and one `events` field per transaction included in the block.

> Applications may respond to ABCI++ method of transaction execution with a set of events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications may respond to this ABCI++ method with an event for each executed transaction.
```

Author: Thanks for spotting
